Introduction
The task of this thesis is to choose one existing watermarking algorithm
and implement it in the context of the LLVM project . The LLVM project
aims to provide efficient compiler and toolchain technologies. It has
started as a research project at the University of Illinois  and is now
developed by many people as an open-source project . The goal is to
extend existing LLVM tools or structures to provide an automated
watermarking process during compilation. The approach of this thesis
extends the LLVM tool opt used by the LLVM project to analyze and
optimize source code. opt can be extended by writing an LLVM pass which
can be described as a plugin that implements additional analysis,
optimization, or transformation. An LLVM pass must define a scope it
will be used in. The widest scope is the module that represents the
whole program. Other scopes can be structures like functions or loops.

This thesis is based on a dynamic path-based approach proposed by   in
2004. The algorithm embeds a watermark into the branching behavior of a
program. It splits one unconditional jump instruction such that control
flow does not directly translate to the jump target. Instead, it jumps
through well-defined locations in the text section of the executable
which encodes the watermark. To execute these jumps, the algorithm
inserts a so-called branch function. This function manipulates the next
instruction pointer value to transfer the program execution to an
address according to a jump table. Thus, the algorithm adds a table to
the binary holding jump target addresses. The function obfuscates the
control flow making it hard to analyze the marked executable statically.
However, a dynamic analysis reveals the original control flow making the
basic algorithm, presented by , not resilient against attacks that try
to remove the watermark. To extract the watermark, the recognition
algorithm dynamically traces the program execution to find a jump
sequence caused by the branch function. The algorithm evaluates the
trace comparing the jump targets in this sequence with each other and
decodes the watermark.

The approach developed in this thesis has to challenge a few aspects.
First, the original embedding algorithm was designed to be used on
already compiled binaries. Using the algorithm in the context of LLVM
creates one major issue. The LLVM tool opt works with a
target-independent intermediate code representation that is highly
abstracted concerning low-level target machine information. This means,
at the time of embedding, there is no information about the addresses of
the instructions. Therefore, it is not trivial to construct a jump table
containing the jump target addresses. It limits the complexity of the
algorithm. Furthermore, the approach of this thesis needs to implement
an LLVM pass that acts on the whole module. However, LLVM documents only
the process of writing an LLVM function pass . Information deviating
from this is rare or not present on the internet or in the literature
but is essential to implement an automated watermarking process.

The approach of this thesis will provide solutions to these challenges
and contribute to existing research concerning watermarking using LLVM.
The LLVM project allows using one implementation of a watermarking
algorithm with multiple programming languages and target computer
architectures. However, not many publications exist on this subject yet.

This thesis is structured into six chapters. In the following chapter, I
will go into existing research related to path-based watermarking
methods and watermarking methods using LLVM. Then, chapter 3 will
describe the background and the environment in which the approach is
implemented. Chapters 4 and 5 describe and evaluate the implementation,
and chapter 6 concludes the approach of this thesis.

Related Work

Watermarking has been practiced in a great variety in the past to this
day. One of the first documented software watermarking methods  was
described by   in a patent in 1996. It presents an algorithm that
reorders the basic blocks of an executable to encode a unique signature.
Thus this method is statically modifying a binary while preserving the
original functionality of the watermarked program. In their paper,  
classify this method as a reordering-based approach. There are different
types of approaches, like path- or branch-based, obfuscation-based, or
graph theoretic-based ones, to name a few. All of these approaches
implement either a static or a dynamic watermarking method.

  proposed one of the first dynamic watermarking techniques named
"Dynamic Graph Watermarking". This method embeds a watermark in the
topology of a dynamically built data structure on the heap.

This thesis’s watermarking algorithm is a dynamic path-based approach
using the llvm-ir. Therefore, this chapter will first discuss some other
dynamic path-based watermarking methods, and then some techniques using
the llvm-ir.

Path-based approaches

According to , the first path-based watermarking method was presented by
  in 2004. Their approach embeds a watermark into an executable by
redirecting unconditional jump instructions using a branch function.
This approach is the basis of this thesis’s implementation.

In 2005,   presented a hybrid static-dynamic attack against the
watermarking algorithm proposed by . This attack uses tools like GDB,
the GNU debugger, to trace the program execution and behavior in order
to entirely remove the usage of the branch function.

Another approach based on the one from was made by  . They extended the
branch function to create a fingerprint mark in addition to an
authorship mark. This makes it possible to trace back the original
acquirer of a program’s instance after an illegal redistribution. The
fingerprint branch function can redirect the control flow not only from
unconditional branches but also from conditional jump instructions.
Further, the function computes a key with every call used to check the
integrity of the particular branch target.

In 2006,   presented an automated attack against the watermarking
algorithm proposed by . It uses subtractive and watermark-replacement
attacks utilizing debugging tools to remove the fingerprint and
integrity check implemented by the fingerprint branch function. Later,
in 2007, they proposed an improved embedding algorithm  than that
described by . Their approach increases the embedded watermark’s stealth
by providing security against debugging attacks discussed in their
previous paper from 2006.

As stated by , the next published research concerning path-based
approaches was by   in 2017. They introduce control flow obfuscation to
embed a watermark into a program. The algorithm creates a hidden
execution path by connecting obfuscated branches with the help of a
neural network module. Due to the obfuscation, the watermarked
structures are easy to recognize. Comparable to the implementation of
this thesis, these manipulated structures are unusual. A standard
compiler would not generate such code. This watermark’s strength relies
on the complexity of the branch obfuscation, making it hard to reverse
engineer them.

In their paper,   presented a strong watermarking method using a
semantic-integrated approach. This method is based on the one by . It
embeds a neural network module into the executable which calculates
branch targets at runtime. The strength of the watermark depends on
whether this neural network module can be reverse-engineered or not.
This requires the neural network’s rules to be extracted which is proved
to be an NP-hard problem.

Approaches using LLVM IR

The watermark techniques from the last section embed the watermark into
an already compiled binary. The approaches mentioned in this section
embed a watermark using the llvm-ir. Likewise the approach of this
thesis. This means the embedding algorithms are applied to the source
code. Theoretically, since the llvm-ir is target-independent, the
embedded watermark can be used on multiple architectures using one
codebase.

In their paper,   propose three methods to embed a watermark into
llvm-ir. All presented methods implement reordering-based approaches
manipulating the order of instructions, basic blocks, and functions.
However, the paper does not provide an extraction method and does not
evaluate the resilience of the presented watermarking methods against
attacks.

Recently, in 2020,   proposed a dynamic watermarking technique based on
an approach from   using control flow obfuscation. The method embeds a
watermark into the execution state of a program using Shamir’s secret
sharing scheme and collatz conjecture. To extract the watermark, they
instrument the original llvm-ir and apply this to the watermarked
program. The collatz function is hard to find in the marked executable
making the watermark relatively strong due to its stealth.

Environment

This chapter describes the working environment of this thesis. The main
part of it is the LLVM project , which will be extended in order to
insert watermarks during the compilation process. In this chapter, I
will emphasize some parts of the LLVM project and how I use them to
embed a watermark.

The LLVM project contains open-source compiler and toolchain
technologies that can be used to optimize and generate code. The focus
of this thesis is on Clang, the LLVM C, C++, and Object-C compiler and
the LLVM Core libraries. The latter provides utilities for
target-independent optimization and code generation, and most of the
LLVM tools are build around them.

In their book "Getting Started with LLVM Core Libraries"   describe that
the LLVM tools are organized in a frontend and a backend. The frontend
converts source code into the llvm-ir. On this abstract level, tools
like opt can run multiple code optimizations, which are implemented in
so-called llvm-ir passes. When this is done, the backend converts the
llvm-ir into object code or assembly.

The approach of this thesis extends the LLVM frontend by providing an
additional llvm-ir pass. In the following sections, I will describe the
llvm-ir, focusing on the structures that I used for the approach, and
then explain how the implemented pass can be used with the LLVM project.

LLVM IR

The LLVM Core libraries work with an intermediate code representation
called llvm-ir. The llvm-ir is syntactically similar to an assembly
language, but target-independent. This means that the LLVM tools can
produce code for different architectures.

The IR is structured as follows: A program is represented as a module. A
module contains metadata, constant variables, global variables, and
functions. A function is built out of basic blocks, and a basic block
consists of instructions. This llvm-ir is one part of the implementation
of the approach in this thesis and will be used to manipulate the source
code of the input program.

Listing [lst:llvm-ir-example] shows a simple example of an llvm-ir
module. It represents an add function that takes one 32-bit integer as
an input parameter and returns a 32-bit integer as a result of an add
operation.

    source_filename = "example.c"
    target datalayout = "e-m:e-i64:64-f80:128-n8:16:32:64-S128"
    target triple = "x86_64-pc-linux-gnu"

    @global_var = dso_local global i32 4, align 4

    define dso_local i32 @add(i32) #0 {
    entry:
      %2 = alloca i32, align 4
      store i32 %0, i32* %2, align 4
      %3 = load i32, i32* @global_var, align 4
      %4 = load i32, i32* %2, align 4
      %5 = add nsw i32 %3, %4
      ret i32 %5
    }

    attributes #0 = { noinline nounwind optnone uwtable ... }

The metadata of the module contains some information about the source
file and the target machine. The target triple tells about the target
cpu architecture. The target datalayout gives information about the bit
width of data types.

Functions and global variables can be defined locally in the module or
refer to an external definition. This way, for example, if the code in
the listing [lst:llvm-ir-example] would use the C standard library
function printf(), this function would be defined in the module only by
its function header. Also, each function may have attributes that are
defined at the end of the LLVM module.

The llvm-ir uses the ssa form. This means, that each variable is defined
and assigned once. It will not be reassigned. The ssa form makes it
easier to optimize the code since it is a simple task to trace back a
variable. This way, this representation helps with constant propagation
and dead code elimination, to name a few .

Globals and constants

Global and globally defined constant variables in llvm-ir behave as
expected: Global variables can be accessed and modified from every
function in the module, and globally defined constants act the same but
are immutable. Both are defined in the module level, the same level
where functions are defined. This approach uses global constants as a
placeholder for values that are not known in this abstracted and
target-independent level. Later in the compilation process in the LLVM
backend, when more target-specific code is generated, these values can
be determined. To be more specific, the placeholder in this constant
variable will be created through an llvm-ir function called
blockaddress() . This function returns the address of a basic block,
which can not be determined while in the LLVM frontend. I will go into
this in more detail later in chapter 4 "".

Basic Blocks

One level deeper, we come to the basic blocks. Every function consists
of at least one basic block, and every basic block must have at least
one predecessor block, except the first one. Furthermore, every basic
block has a sequence of instructions, with the last one being a
so-called terminator. A terminator instruction can be, for instance, a
branch to another basic block in this function or a return instruction.
Each block has a name, which is unique for the parent function. This
name can be used with the previously mentioned blockaddress() function.

PHI nodes

PHI nodes are a consequence of the ssa form. They are needed in
situations where a variable can be assigned a different value depending
on the control flow. This means the value can not be determined
statically. A PHI node must be defined at the start of a basic block as
the first instruction, and it defines one value for each predecessor
block of its parent basic block. The value can be a variable or an
immediate value.

Inline Assembly

This thesis’s approach uses two structures that act as a symbolic value
in the LLVM frontend and get evaluated in the LLVM backend, where the
code reaches a more target-specific level. The LLVM function
blockaddress() is one of these structures. The other one is the inline
assembly.

    call void asm sideeffect "push %rbp", ""()

Listing [lst:llvm-inline-asm] shows that in llvm-ir inline assembly is
represented as a function call. It can take input parameters to use with
constraints and return a value with a predefined data type. It is to
emphasize that this inline assembly call is target-specific.

Implementation

In the previous chapters, I described the environment this approach is
working on and what type of watermarking method I will use in this
thesis. This chapter will explain in detail how the method works, how it
is implemented, and how this watermarking method can be used within the
LLVM project.

The approach of this thesis is implementing a method that was presented
by   in 2004. They describe a path-based watermarking technique using a
construct called branch functions. I will call the implemented method
the branch function method.

The approach of this thesis is implemented and tested on an x86_64 Linux
machine.

Basic algorithm

The idea of the basic algorithm, proposed by , is to embed a watermark
into the control flow of a program by using a branch function. A branch
function is a function that is called in a normal way by the executing
program. Formally it takes no arguments and returns a void data type,
like listing [lst:branch-function-call] shows. However, actually, it
manipulates the return address such that the program will resume at a
different address than the caller function intended. That way, the
control flow can be manipulated at runtime and gets obfuscated.

    call void @branchFunction()

In the first step, the embedding algorithm chooses one unconditional
jump instruction and replaces it with a call to the branch function. The
branch function maps that call to the original jump destination by using
a minimal perfect hash table during runtime. This hash table can be
generated in many ways, simple or complicated, but the basic idea is the
following: A call instruction to a function func in assembly language
will execute two instructions, pushq %rip and jmp func. Thus the caller
function saves the next instruction pointer %rip on the stack and jumps
to the start of the branch function. The branch function uses that
instruction pointer to calculate the destination address index in the
hash table. Formally, the mapping of the branch function can be
described as follows:
d = T(h(s)) + s
with T representing the hash table, h the hash function, s the saved
instruction pointer, and d the destination address. After the
calculation, the branch function overrides the saved instruction pointer
with the destination address d and returns, which causes the control
flow to move on from that address d.

The second step embeds the actual watermark, which is encoded as a bit
sequence. One bit is represented by a call to the branch function and
whether the destination address that the branch function navigates to is
higher or lower than the address of the saved instruction pointer. A
higher destination address encodes a 1 and a lower one a 0.

In order to embed the watermark, the algorithm splits the prepared jump
from step one into w + 1 jumps, with w being the length of the bit
sequence.
$$\begin{gathered}
    start \rightarrow dest\\
    \downarrow\\
    start \rightarrow a_{1} \rightarrow a_{2} \rightarrow a_{3} \rightarrow \dots \rightarrow a_{w} \rightarrow dest\\
\end{gathered}$$
Each a_(i), i ∈ {1, 2, 3, …, w}, is a call to the branch function and is
placed in the binary after an unconditional jump instruction. This
placement is chosen because the original control flow can never reach
these function calls. Figure 4.1 shows an example by encoding the bit
sequence ‘1001‘. The left code shows the state before the embedding. The
locations a_(i) indicate possible embedding locations. Each of these
embedding locations can hold any amount of branch function calls. The
code to the right describes a possible watermark embedding. The
locations in grey show the jump target of a particular branch function.

Approach

After I realized that my first approach was not able to implement such a
jump table like described by Collberg et al., I had to change the
functionality of the jump table. Since the main problem was that I have
no information about the final binary addresses during the optimization
phase of the LLVM compiler, I needed to build the jump table in a manner
where the exact addresses do not matter. The idea was to use labels as
symbolic values since labels get replaced with the actual address in the
final binary. To achieve that, I used the LLVM IR function
blockaddress() . This function takes an LLVM basic block pointer as an
input parameter and returns that basic block’s address.

This function is available in the llvm-ir and in the llvm-ir pass itself
as a C++ function . In C++ this function is implemented in the
BlockAddress class as BlockAddress::get(BasicBlock *BB). First, I tried
to compute the address from this function to build a hash table, but
these addresses do not act as symbolic values during optimization time,
thus can not be used for calculation.

The solution to this is to assign the result of that function to an LLVM
global constant variable. This way, the result from the LLVM function
blockaddress() can be used as a symbolic value by using the constant
variable. I save these global constants in an array in the LLVM IR,
which results in an array of addresses that is present in the .rodata
section of the binary. It holds the source srcAddr and target destAddr
addresses of each call to the branch function and has a form like this:
[srcAddr₀, destAddr₀, srcAddr₁, destAddr₁, …, srcAddr_(n), destAddr_(n)]
During runtime, the branch function in the watermarked program will
determine the jump target by searching for the srcAddr in the array.

This array is a very simple implementation of this approach. I could
arrange the address pairs in a more complex way to be more robust
against attacks. However, it’s not worth the effort because, to
understand that array’s structure, the attacker has to trace the program
execution, which will expose the address arrangement regardless of the
complexity of the array implementation.

Bit encoding and decoding

The watermarking algorithm of this thesis embeds a watermark according
to a bit sequence. This bit sequence is generated from an text provided
by the user through a file that must be placed in the same folder as the
shared object containing the llvm-ir pass. The text in this file is the
watermark that will be embedded into the executable.

To encode the text, the algorithm converts each ascii character into its
byte representation in left-to-right inverted binary format. Thus each
character from the watermark text adds 8 bits to the bit sequence. For
example, the watermark text "AB" contains two characters. The first
character A has a hexadecimal value 0x41, which is 0100 0001 in binary
representation. Now the bits get inverted, which will result in the bit
sequence 1000 0010. Finally, the encoded text "AB" has the following bit
sequence: 1000 0010 0100 0010.

The watermark extraction process will output such a bit sequence. To
decode that sequence, the algorithm will split it into 8-bit chunks,
invert each chunk, and convert that 8-bit value into its ascii character
representation.

Embedding

Three prerequisites have to be satisfied to start with the embedding
process. If these are not met, the compilation process will continue
without embedding a watermark. First, the target architecture must be
x86_64. Although the LLVM IR is target-independent, the embedding
algorithm needs to produce target dependent code using llvm-ir inline
assembly. However, since the target machine is known during the pass
execution, the watermarking pass can be extended to support multiple
architectures. The pass just has to create the appropriate inline
assembly. Second, the watermark has to be provided by the user in a text
file, as described in subsection 4.3.1. The watermark must contain at
least one ascii character and can include any multiline text.
Theoretically, the watermark can have an unlimited length, but depending
on the location used to embed the watermark, a long watermark can
significantly slow down the program execution. I will discuss this in
chapter 5 "". The third and the last prerequisite is that the embedding
algorithm needs at least three jump instructions in the final binary.
Like I have described in section 4.1, one jump instruction has to be
split. This jump instruction will be the entry point for the encoded
watermark. The algorithm of this thesis is designed this way, so it does
not use this entry point jump instruction as a valid watermark embedding
location. So at least two other jump instructions must be present in the
final binary to allow the forward and backward jumps, which encode the
bit sequence of the watermark.

After all prerequisites are met, the embedding algorithm starts to
manipulate the llvm-ir. Figure 4.2 shows an overview of the embedding
process. In the following parts, I will go through the steps listed in
the embedding algorithm Embed(W) and describe each point in detail.

Embed(W) – 1. Create empty branch function

The first step of the embedding algorithm is to create a new llvm-ir
function and insert it into the LLVM module. This is needed to have a
reference for the ’call bf()’ instruction. I leave the function body
empty because the branch function needs to reference the global constant
array, which will be created later in step 5.

Embed(W) – 2. Calculate distribution

This step distributes the branch function calls that encode the
watermark W. The distribution algorithm assigns one call per bit in the
bit sequence of the watermark to a random jump in the final binary that
is suitable for that specific bit. The distribution algorithm ensures
that the assignment is balanced across all used unconditional jumps. The
algorithm generates a list, which holds information about the position
and the order of each branch function call that corresponds to a bit in
the bit sequence. Like Collberg et al. described, the algorithm has to
split one unconditional jump to embed the watermark. The algorithm of
this approach chooses always the first jump instruction that can be
manipulated by it. In other words, the algorithm will choose the one
jump instruction that will have the lowest address in the final binary.

Not all unconditional branches in the llvm-ir module can be used for
this process because some branches will be omitted in the final,
compiled binary or cause invalidation of the llvm-ir when used by the
embedding algorithm. The embedding algorithm has three criteria to
determine if an unconditional branch can be used for the embedding
process. First, the algorithm avoids branches that exist in the llvm-ir
but will be omitted during the compilation, thus will not exist in the
final binary. This situation occurs when the target basic block of an
unconditional branch is the next node in the parent function’s
control-flow graph. Two basic blocks in this context likely get merged
during the compilation process. The other criteria relate to the target
basic block only. In the next embedding step, the algorithm needs to
change the target of an unconditional branch. This means that the
original target basic block loses one predecessor block. If this happens
to all its predecessors, this block will invalidate the module because
the llvm-ir requires every basic block to have at least one predecessor,
except the first one of a function. Thus the embedding algorithm will
ignore unconditional branches that target a basic block, which
predecessors are all valid unconditional branches according to the other
criteria. The third and last criterion is to avoid target basic blocks
with LLVM PHI nodes. A PHI node holds references to other basic blocks
and must have one argument for each predecessor of its parent basic
block. When a predecessor is removed by the embedding algorithm, the PHI
node can no longer satisfy this requirement, and the LLVM module
invalidates.

Embed(W) – 3. Insert before every BR a ’call bf()’

In section 4.1, I described the basic embedding algorithm presented by
Collberg et al. This basic algorithm selects one unconditional jump
instruction in the binary and splits it to embed the watermark. All
other jump instructions remain the same.

In this thesis’s approach, the algorithm transforms every unconditional
jump instruction into a call instruction to the branch function. This
contributes to the robustness of the watermark, which I will discuss
later in chapter 5 "".

In earlier approaches, I replaced the branch instructions with branch
function calls. This broke the llvm-ir module because it deleted the
LLVM terminator instruction of that basic block and the reference to the
target basic block and invalidated the module. Then I tried to solve
this by inserting the branch function call instruction right before the
jump instruction and replacing the jump with another terminator
instruction called unreachable . This still deleted the reference to the
target basic block but did not invalidate the module. That worked as
long as I used only the LLVM opt tool to test the watermarking pass but
produced a segmentation fault when used with clang, which was the
intended usage for this pass. So I decided to leave the original
unconditional jump instructions but redirect the target every time to
the particular function’s second basic block. This way, all information
about the original control flow is still lost, and it remains
obfuscated.

Every time the algorithm inserts a branch function call, it splits the
basic block right before that call. The split makes each branch function
call the first instruction in a basic block, which means that the
address of the basic block is the same as the address of that call
instruction. With this, the embedding algorithm is able to save the
source address of an unconditional jump, which is the address of the new
basic block after the split, and the destination address, which is the
address of the basic block of the original branch instruction target.

Embed(W) – 4. Insert ’call bf()’ according to distribution in 2.

Now the llvm-ir module is prepared to insert the branch function calls
that encode the watermark. This step connects to step 2, where the
distribution of the branch function calls was calculated. Like in the
previous step, the embedding algorithm splits the basic block with every
branch function call insertion to be able to save the source address of
that jump. The destination address is the basic block containing the
next branch function call instruction according to the distribution from
step 2.

Embed(W) – 5. Generate global constant array

This step puts the jump information into the module. Like I described
earlier in this subsection, the information is saved in a global
constant array. The embedding algorithm first creates an LLVM global
variable for each source and destination address, saved in the steps 3
and 4, using the LLVM function BlockAddress::get(BasicBlock *BB). This
creates an llvm-ir entry similar to the one in
listing [lst:llvm-gv-blockaddress]. @func is the parent function of the
basic block %bb_label.

    @GLOB_VAR = constant i8* blockaddress(@func, %bb_label)

The blockaddress() function will be evaluated later in the LLVM backend
at a point where the compiler knows the actual address of the particular
basic block. Thus the global variable @GLOB_VAR acts as a symbolic value
for the basic block address.

Finally, the algorithm generates the global constant array containing
all the global variables.

Embed(W) – 6. Create branch function body

At this point, the LLVM module contains the global array, which will be
used by the branch function during runtime. The embedding algorithm
creates the function body in the llvm-ir using LLVM inline assembly,
which implements two functionalities.

    <branchFunction>:
        push   rax
        push   rsi
        push   rdi
        push   rcx
        push   rdx
        push   rbx
        mov    rax,QWORD PTR [rsp+0x30]
        mov    DWORD PTR [rsp-0xc],0x0
        mov    QWORD PTR [rsp-0x18],rax
    .loop_head
        cmp    DWORD PTR [rsp-0xc],0xc92        ; iterate over array
        jge    .end
        movsxd rax,DWORD PTR [rsp-0xc]
        mov    rax,QWORD PTR [rax*8+0x425160]   ; array in .rodata
        mov    rax,QWORD PTR [rax]
        add    rax,0x5                          ; addr of next instr
        mov    rcx,QWORD PTR [rsp-0x18]
        cmp    rax,rcx
        je     .loop_end
        mov    eax,DWORD PTR [rsp-0xc]
        add    eax,0x2                          ; next address pair
        mov    DWORD PTR [rsp-0xc],eax
        jmp    .loop_head
    .loop_end
        mov    eax,DWORD PTR [rsp-0xc]
        add    eax,0x1
        movsxd rcx,eax
        mov    rcx,QWORD PTR [rcx*8+0x425160]   ; array in .rodata
        movsxd rdx,eax
        mov    rcx,QWORD PTR [rcx]
        mov    QWORD PTR [rsp-0x8],rcx
        mov    rax,QWORD PTR [rsp-0x8]
        mov    QWORD PTR [rsp+0x30],rax
        pop    rbx
        pop    rdx
        pop    rcx
        pop    rdi
        pop    rsi
        pop    rax
        mov    QWORD PTR [rsp-0x20],rdx
    .end:
        ret

First, the inline assembly is needed to create the function prologue and
epilogue. The prologue saves more than the typical callee saved
registers to ensure that the function does not break the program
execution. Then the inline assembly produces code to be able to
manipulate the next instruction pointer after the function returns.

Listing [lst:branch-function] shows the final implementation of the
branch function in assembly language. Line 8 and 10 save the next
instruction pointer saved by the caller function onto the stack. These
lines are created by an LLVM inline assembly, which makes that value
available to the LLVM pass by saving the return value of the inline
assembly call in a variable IP. The value in IP acts as a symbolic value
for that address. The function then loops through the global array and
matches IP against the first address of each address pair in the array.
When a match is found, the function continues at line 26, fetches the
second address of the found address pair, which is the destination of
that particular jump and overrides the saved next instruction pointer by
using another LLVM inline assembly in line 34. After the epilogue, the
control flow will resume at the overridden next instruction pointer.

It is not possible to generate the branch function only by using inline
assembly because, at the time of building that function, the LLVM pass
needs to reference the global constant array, which is an LLVM entity at
this point.

Like I described earlier in this chapter, the global constant array has
a form like this:
[srcAddr₀, destAddr₀, srcAddr₁, destAddr₁, …, srcAddr_(n), destAddr_(n)]
As described above, the branch function has a complexity of O(n) because
it iterates over the global array linearly. However, the embedding
algorithm can be modified such that it generates an ordered array;
ordered by srcAddr_(i). This makes it possible to improve the complexity
by using a binary search on the array to find the matching address.
Although each srcAddr_(i) is a symbolic value, they relate to each other
in the following way: Assuming two actual addresses in the final binary
relate to each other like this
srcAddr_(i) < srcAddr_(j)
then the symbolic values in the llvm-ir relate in the same way because
srcAddr_(i) is positioned earlier in the control flow graph of the
llvm-ir module as srcAddr_(j). With this implementation, the branch
function can reach a complexity of O(log n).

Extraction

The branch function method embeds a dynamic watermark into an
executable. To extract an embedded watermark, the marked program needs
to be executed, and the control flow has to be traced to detect the
watermark. In their paper, Collberg et al. describe the extraction
process as follows: First, they locate the jump instruction jmp_(start),
split by the embedding algorithm, and its original target jmp_(end).
These two locations need to be passed manually to the extraction
algorithm. Then they use a tracer tool, which supports hardware
single-stepping, to execute the marked program. This tool will produce a
dynamic trace of the executed instructions from first reaching
jmp_(start) until reaching jmp_(end). They analyze the produced trace to
identify the branch function. After the branch function is identified,
they analyze the trace again to get a list of address pairs
(src_(i), dest_(i)). src_(i) is the source address from which the branch
function has been called, and dest_(i) is the destination address to
which the branch function is redirecting. Then they compare each of
these address pairs to determine the corresponding bit of the embedded
watermark. If dest_(i) is lower than src_(i), they extract a 0; if
dest_(i) is greater than src_(i), a 1.

This thesis’s approach implements a similar extraction algorithm. To
automate the extraction, I use a python script, and to trace the
execution, I use GDB, the GNU debugging tool .
Listing [lst:wm-extraction] shows how to extract a watermark from a
program prog. The idea is to start GDB with the marked program and use
the GDB option -x FILE to execute GDB commands from the python script,
which implements the extraction algorithm.

    #!/bin/bash
    gdb -x extract.py prog

According to Collberg et al., the algorithm first has to locate the
jmp_(start) address. As I explained in the previous subsection, this is
the branch function call instruction with the lowest address in the
binary. To get that address, the python script uses GDBs disassemble
command to disassemble the text section of the executable. It then uses
a regular expression search to find said instruction. This assumes that
the binary is not stripped and that the script knows the branch
function’s name. A stripped binary file does not contain any debug
information. This means, all symbols are removed from the binary, unless
they are necessary for the program execution. The disassemble command
requires the program to run. So at this point, the python script sets a
breakpoint at the beginning of the main function and starts the program
execution.

After the algorithm has determined the start address, it first executes
step by step the main function until its stack frame is built. Then it
sets the instruction pointer to the address of jmp_(start) and is
therefore ready to trace the program execution. The python script saves
the address pairs (src_(i), dest_(i)) as described by Collberg et al. as
long as the next instruction right after the return from the branch
function is another branch function call. Thus the extraction algorithm
does not need to know the jmp_(dest) address to terminate the trace.

Lastly, the algorithm extracts the bit sequence from the saved addresses
in the same way as described by Collberg et al. and decodes that bit
sequence into the original watermark ascii text using the decoding
algorithm described in subsection 4.3.1.

Limitations

During the embedding of the watermark, the llvm-ir was the most limiting
factor. It has a rigorous syntax, which does not allow much leeway when
it comes to obfuscation. Since the embedding algorithm of this thesis
needs to obfuscate the control flow of the program, it was not trivial
to manipulate the llvm-ir. Besides the strict syntax of the intermediate
representation, a limiting factor was the high abstraction level of the
LLVM frontend. It has by design a minimal set of low-level information
because it is target-independent. Therefore at the runtime of the
llvm-ir pass, there is no information about the addresses the
instructions will have in the compiled binary. So the embedding
algorithm cannot create a hash table as Collberg et al. described in
their approach. Furthermore it can not obfuscate the access to that data
structure containing the jump target addresses needed by the branch
function.

Concerning the watermark extraction, the limiting factor was, that it
has to be an automated process. To be able to automate the watermark
recognition, the extraction algorithm needs at least to know the entry
point of the encoded watermark. This means it needs to know how to find
the address of the jump instruction that was split and surrounds the
embedded watermark. Due to time limitations, I solved this by choosing
the unconditional jump with the lowest address. It would be possible to
find the entry point even though it is assigned to a random or rather
unknown unconditional jump instruction by analyzing the marked program’s
behavior after a call instruction. It would have to recognize the branch
function first and then test every call to the branch function if it
initiates a series of branch function calls or implements a normal jump.
The former case would identify the entry point, assuming the instruction
right before the found one is not a branch function call.

The implementation of the extraction algorithm is designed in a manner
that it needs to know the name of the branch function. Thus the marked
executable must not be stripped. To be able to extract a watermark from
a stripped binary, the algorithm needs to be able to recognize the
branch function. In a scenario where the entry point is known to the
algorithm, the recognition is trivial since the entry point locates a
branch function call instruction. In the other case, the algorithm would
have to analyze the executable to identify the branch function. Again,
due to time limitations, the extraction algorithm of this thesis can
only work on non stripped binaries.

Conclusion

This thesis implements a dynamic path-based watermarking algorithm based
on an approach presented by  . The algorithm is wrapped into an LLVM
module pass that can be used by LLVM’s compiler clang to automatically
embed a given watermark into a program when compiling source code. It
can be automatically extracted using GDB, the GNU debugger.

The basic embedding algorithm proposed by embeds a watermark into the
control flow of a compiled program using a branch function. The branch
function manipulates its return address allowing it to redirect the
control flow to any location in the executable. The algorithm first
replaces one unconditional jump with a call to the branch function.
Further, it splits that jump into additional jumps represented by branch
function calls creating a call sequence terminating in the original jump
target. Each call in this sequence encodes one bit of the watermark
depending on its address relative to the one of its parent jump. A
higher address encodes a 1, a lower address a 0. The branch function
gets its information where to redirect the program execution to from a
minimal perfect hash table that was inserted into the binary by the
algorithm. This watermarking method was designed to embed a watermark
into x86 binaries and Java byte code.

The implementation of this thesis uses llvm-ir to embed a watermark into
source code which makes it possible to use this watermarking method for
various architectures. Using the llvm-ir, the embedding algorithm can
use instruction addresses only as constant symbolic values which makes
it not possible to calculate a hash table as proposed by the basic
algorithm. Instead, the algorithm includes an array into the executable
containing the jump information.

The watermark can be automatically extracted using GDB which uses a
python script that contains the extraction algorithm. The algorithm
searches for the starting point of the embedded watermark, traces the
program execution and evaluates the control flow to recover the embedded
bit sequence. The ASCII watermark is encoded as such a bit sequence by
left-to-right inverting eight bits per ASCII character.

The llvm-ir was the most limiting factor in this thesis. Due to its
strict syntax, control flow obfuscation is hard to implement. Any syntax
violation causes an invalidation of the LLVM module which causes clang
to terminate in an error state not embedding the watermark.

This thesis evaluates the implementation in terms of credibility,
robustness, transparency, resilience, data rate, and overhead. The
credibility describes how reliable the watermark is in identifying the
creator. Because the branch function method creates unambiguous and
partly unique structures in the binary, the extraction is precise; thus
highly reliable. The robustness describes how hard it is to remove the
watermark. In contrast to the proposed basic algorithm, this approach
improves the robustness by converting as much unconditional jump
instructions as possible to hide the entry point to the embedded
watermark. This conversion is limited by the llvm-ir syntax, as
mentioned before. The benefit of unambiguous structures concerning
credibility is a disadvantage concerning the transparency which
describes how easy it is to detect watermarked code for an attacker.
These structures are not produced by a standard compiler making them
very conspicuous and easy to find. Furthermore, the resilience of the
watermark was tested against additive and distortive attacks. Additive
attacks can only be successful when not damaging the original watermark.
Thus, the attacker can not remove or destroy the watermark with this
technique, but it is possible to embed other watermarks. However, it
still would be possible to extract the original one. The data rate
describes how much information the embedded watermark can hold. This
approach can save a constant value of one ASCII character per eight bit.
Lastly, the overhead is proportional to the embedded watermark size in
both the file size and the execution time. The file size increases by
approximately 300 KiB when embedding an 8192-bit long watermark that
encodes 1024 characters of ASCII text. Concerning the execution time,
the presented implementation can slow down a marked program
significantly when long watermarks are used. However, this thesis
describes a method that improves the complexity of this algorithm from
being O(n) to O(log n) which solves the problem of the high overhead in
execution time.

The approach of this thesis has successfully implemented a fully
functioning and efficient watermarking algorithm using llvm-ir passes.
The greatest advantage is that the LLVM pass works with all programming
languages supported by LLVM without any adaption. Further, the
implemented LLVM pass can be used for any target computer architecture
supported by LLVM. However, when used for any other architecture than
x86_64, this needs some minor adaptation of the used inline assembly to
match the target instruction set.

As described earlier, the algorithm can be improved in its overhead and,
additionally, in the branch function’s complexity to make the function,
thus the watermark, harder to remove. Due to its original design,
however, there is not much leeway to further improve the resilience
against attacks.

In conclusion, the presented watermarking algorithm can be used within
all types of projects that use LLVM as the compiler environment and want
to embed a robust and efficient ASCII text-based watermark into their
programs.
